Introduce CUDA backend specification (#197)
KhronosGroup/SYCL-Docs: adoc/chapters/cuda_backend.adoc

[appendix]
[[chapter:cuda-backend]]
= CUDA backend specification

This chapter describes how the SYCL general programming model is mapped on top
of CUDA, and how the SYCL generic interoperability interface must be
implemented by vendors providing SYCL for CUDA implementations to ensure SYCL
applications written for the CUDA backend are interoperable.

The CUDA backend is enabled using the `sycl::backend::cuda` value of `enum
class backend`. That means that when the CUDA backend is active, the value of
`sycl::is_backend_active<sycl::backend::cuda>::value` will be `true`, and the
preprocessor macro `SYCL_BACKEND_CUDA` will be defined.

The CUDA backend requires an installation of CUDA SDK as well as one or more
CUDA devices available in the system.
[[sec:cuda:introduction]]
== Introduction

[[sec:cuda:mapping_of_sycl_programming_model]]
== Mapping of SYCL programming model

This section gives a general overview of how the SYCL programming model maps to
CUDA. These two programming models are pretty similar in essence however they do
have a few differences in terminology and architecture.

[[sub:cuda:platform_model]]
=== Platform Model

> All CUDA enabled devices which can be executed on are represented by a single `CUdevice`. A SYCL device maps to a single CUDA device.

Author: This wording has been updated to address this, so I think this is resolved now.

to emulate a SYCL <<context>> containing multiple devices. Additionally, while
SYCL contexts are simple objects passed around either implicitly or explicitly,
CUDA contexts require to be activated on the current thread to be used by other
CUDA entry points. Therefore any use of the SYCL APIs with a CUDA backend may
modify the current active context on the thread, and no guarantee is provided
that any existing active CUDA context would be restored by SYCL.

A SYCL <<queue>> simply maps to one or multiple CUDA streams. Indeed while a
CUDA stream is in-order, a SYCL <<queue>> isn't, so a CUDA backend implementation
may use multiple CUDA streams to implement an out of order SYCL <<queue>>.

[[sub:cuda:memory_model]]
=== Memory model

==== Memory Allocations

When non-host accessors to buffers are created without [code]#target::host_buffer# they need to allocate memory for their contents on the device. For example using [code]#cudaMalloc3D()#, [code]#cudaMallocPitch()# or [code]#cudaMalloc()#.

When accessors to images are created without [code]#target::host_buffer# they allocate memory, for example using [code]#cudaMalloc3DArray()# or [code]#cudaMallocArray()#. 

> When non-host accessors are created with [code]#target::host_buffer# they can, for example use [code]#cudaHostAlloc()# to allocate pinned memory on host.

Reviewer: Yeah, this is just wrong. Will be removed.

Table <<table.cuda.memmodel.USM>> specifies which underlying CUDA functions can be used for USM allocations. For shared USM allocations this would mean memory is managed (moved between host and different devices) by CUDA runtime. Alternatively shared USM allocations can be managed by SYCL runtime, using non-managed CUDA allocation on device when needed, such as [code]#cudaMalloc()#.

[[table.cuda.memmodel.USM]]
.Cuda functions that could be used to allocate SYCL USM allocations
[width="100%",options="header",cols="50%,50%"]
|====
| SYCL USM type | CUDA function
| device | [code]#cudaMalloc()#
| host | [code]#cudaHostAlloc()#
| shared | [code]#cudaMallocManaged()#

> |====

Reviewer: Agreed. The section on memory allocations will be removed.

The CUDA backend supports API interoperability for `platform`, `device`,
`context`, `queue`, `event` and `buffer`. Interoperability for `kernel`,
`kernel_bundle`, `device_image`, `sampled_image` and `unsampled_image` is not
supported.

[[table.cuda.appinterop.nativeobjects]]
.Types of native backend objects application interoperability
[width="100%",options="header",cols="20%,20%,20%,40%"]
|====
| [code]#SyclType# | [code]#backend_input_t<backend::cuda, SyclType># | [code]#backend_return_t<backend::cuda, SyclType># | Description
| [code]#platform# | `std::vector<CUdevice>`   | `std::vector<CUdevice>`  | A SYCL platform encapsulates a list of CUDA devices.
| [code]#device#   | `CUdevice`                | `CUdevice`               | A SYCL device encapsulates a CUDA device.
| [code]#context#  | `CUcontext`               | `std::vector<CUcontext>` | A SYCL context can encapsulate multiple CUDA contexts , however it is not possible to create a SYCL context from multiple CUDA contexts.
| [code]#queue#    | `CUstream`   | `CUstream` | A SYCL queue encapsulates a CUDA stream.
| [code]#event#    | `CUevent`    | `CUevent`  | A SYCL event encapsulates a CUDA event.

> | [code]#buffer# | `struct { CUdeviceptr ptr; size_t size; }` | `CUdeviceptr` | A SYCL buffer encapsulates a CUDA device pointer.

Reviewer 2: A question came up recently about the return value of `get_native()` for `buffer`.  What value is returned if `buffer` is a sub-buffer?  Is it a pointer to the original (non-sub) buffer, or is it an offset to the start of the sub-buffer?  It would be nice if there was a table describing the behavior of `get_native()` for each of these objects.  That table would be a good place to clarify things like this.

Reviewer 2: Another question about the interop for `buffer` ... the OpenCL interop has a *vector* of `cl_mem` object because there might be multiple OpenCL devices on the system and the buffer might be represented on more than one device.  (At least I think that's the reasoning.)  Is it correct that there's just a single `CUdeviceptr` here, or should there be a vector of them?

Author: So we've been discussing application interop for `buffer` as well and for a few reasons we came to the conclusion that we should not support it and instead encourage `buffer` interop via `interop_handle::get_native_mem`:
* As you mentioned, as a `buffer` can represent multiple devices it would need to return a vector of `CUdeviceptr`, but because it allocates data lazily, this would also mean we would either need to return a partial list of memory objects depending on the current state of the runtime or enforce allocation within the `get_native`.
* If the return value has multiple memory objects, we would need some way to reflect which one has the latest copy of the data.
* A `buffer` can also represent memory on the host and potentially across multiple backends, and representing this would add further complexity to the return type.

In effect we came to the conclusion we would need to replicate much of the inner workings of a `buffer` in order to make it really useful to users, and the use cases we had could be supported via host task interop.

|====

[[table.cuda.appinterop.make_interop_APIs]]
.[code]#make_*# Interoperability APIs for native backend objects.
[width="100%",options="header",cols="40%,60%"]
|====
| CUDA interoperability function                                    |  Description
| [code]#template<backend Backend> +
platform + 
make_platform(const backend_input_t<Backend, platform> &backendObject);# 

>         | Create a SYCL `platform` from a list of CUDA device, the list must contain at least one CUDA device.

Reviewer 3: Only one platform makes sense but I'm not sure it's a requirement we want to introduce. For example at the moment DPC++ will return one platform per CUDA device, it will likely be changed in the future to only one platform, but still it's possible for vendors to organize their platforms in different ways.

It does make it a little strange if someone tries to create a platform with a subset of devices that's not in `get_platforms()`. So we might need to revisit this a bit.

>         | Create a SYCL `platform` from a list of CUDA device, the list must contain at least one CUDA device.

Reviewer 2: I think it is already a requirement because the SYCL core spec says the following in [section 4.6.2 "Platform class"](https://www.khronos.org/registry/SYCL/specs/sycl-2020/html/sycl-2020.html#sec:platform-class):

> The execution environment for a SYCL application has a fixed number of platforms which does not vary as the application executes. The application can get a list of all these platforms via platform::get_platforms(). The platform class also provides constructors, but constructing a new platform instance merely creates a new object that is a copy of one of the objects returned by platform::get_platforms().

>         | Create a SYCL `platform` from a list of CUDA device, the list must contain at least one CUDA device.

Reviewer 3: Well yes, the fixed number of platforms is a requirement, what I meant was that I'm not sure the backend spec should mandate that all CUDA devices be under the same platform.

>         | Create a SYCL `platform` from a list of CUDA device, the list must contain at least one CUDA device.

Reviewer 2: Yes, I think that makes sense too.  I'd just like to see some wording in the description of `make_platform()` that the returned `platform` object is a copy of one of the objects returned by the core API `platform::get_platforms()`.  For example, this is what the Level Zero interop spec says:

> Constructs a SYCL platform instance from a Level-Zero `ze_driver_handle_t`. The SYCL execution environment contains a fixed number of platforms that are enumerated via `sycl::platform::get_platforms()`. Calling this function does not create a new platform. Rather it merely creates a `sycl::platform` object that is a copy of one of the platforms from that enumeration.

>         | Create a SYCL `platform` from a list of CUDA device, the list must contain at least one CUDA device.

Author: The wording for this has been updated to reflect that `make_platform` doesn't create a new platform just returns a `platform` object that is a copy of one of the existing platforms, so I think this is resolved now.

| [code]#template<backend Backend> +
device +
make_device(const backend_input_t<Backend, device> &backendObject);# 

>         | Create a SYCL `device` from a CUDA device.

Author: The wording for this has been updated to reflect that `make_device` doesn't create a new platform just returns a `device` object that is a copy of one of the existing devices, so I think this is resolved now.

 
| [code]#template <backend Backend, typename T, int dimensions = 1,
           typename AllocatorT = buffer_allocator<std::remove_const_t<T>>> +
buffer<T, dimensions, AllocatorT> +
make_buffer(const backend_input_t<Backend, buffer<T, dimensions, AllocatorT>>
                &backendObject,
            const context &targetContext);#
        | Create a SYCL `buffer` from a CUDA device pointer.` The CUDA pointer must be within the provided `targetContext`. Only `dimensions == 1` is supported.

|====

==== Ownership of native backend objects

The CUDA backend retains ownership of all native CUDA objects obtained through
the interoperability API, therefore associated SYCL objects must be kept alive
for the duration of the CUDA work using these native CUDA objects.
dd CUDA backend specification kernel function interop definitions

When creating a SYCL object from a native CUDA object SYCL does not take
ownership of the object and it is up to the application to dispose of them when

> appropriate.

Reviewer 3: Yes, we looked at that, and I do think it makes sense as well, however it does use an extension header, which is fine as the Level Zero is maintained separately, but it's not ideal if we want the CUDA backend spec to be part of the main SYCL specification.

So we decided to go with a simpler approach for now, for the CUDA backend spec, with the idea in mind that we should probably look into maybe codifying what Level Zero is doing directly in the SYCL interop API, or at least a similar system that could be re-used by the non-OpenCL backends to handle ownership.

> appropriate.

Reviewer 2: > however it does use an extension header, which is fine as the Level Zero is maintained separately, but it's not ideal if we want the CUDA backend spec to be part of the main SYCL specification.

Sorry, I'm not following.  What do you mean by "it does use an extension header"?  How does this preclude the interop API from being part of the main SYCL specification?

> appropriate.

Reviewer 3: It doesn't preclude it, we just thought it might be better done separately as a generic change to the interop API that could be used by all backends.

> appropriate.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure it makes sense to try to solve this in a general way in the core spec, since only some backends have this issue of "ownership".  (For example, OpenCL doesn't have this issue because objects are reference counted.)  For backends that have this issue (e.g. Level Zero, CUDA), I think it makes sense for each backend to define the mechanism for deciding who "owns" an object.  Of course, it would be better if all backends had a similar mechanism, though.

If the Level Zero mechanism seems good to others, can we use that for CUDA too?  If it has flaws, we could discuss them and potentially adopt a consistent mechanism across both backends.

> appropriate.

Reviewer 3: I would argue that the OpenCL backend also has this issue of ownership, it's just that it happens to be easily solved by the OpenCL reference counting. And that the Level Zero approach could easily be implemented by the OpenCL backend, where the ownership transfer would just dictate how SYCL calls `clRetain*` and `clRelease*` on the OpenCL objects.

I could be completely wrong on that but looking at the interop API with `make_*` and `get_*` it seems to me that ownership questions would naturally come up and I get the feeling that maybe it wasn't part of the original interop API simply because it was solved so easily by reference counting for the OpenCL backend.

=== Kernel Function Interoperability

This section describes the kernel function interoperability for the CUDA
backend.

The CUDA backend supports kernel function interoperability for the `accessor`,
`local_accessor`, `sampled_image_accessor`, `unsampled_image_accessor` and
`stream` classes.

The CUDA backend does not support interoperability for the `device_event` class
as there's no equivalent in CUDA.

Address spaces in CUDA are associated with variable decorations rather than the
type, so when pointers are passed as parameters to a function the parameter
types does not need to be decorated with an address space, instead it's simply a
raw un-decorated pointer. For this reason the `accessor`,  `local_accessor` and
`stream` classes map to a raw undecorated pointer which can be implemented using
the generic address space.

Other kernel function types in CUDA are represented by aliases provided in the
`sycl::cuda` namespace. These are provided for the `sampled_image_accessor`,
and `unsampled_image_accessor` classes; `sycl::cuda::texture` and
`sycl::cuda::surface` respectively.

Below is a table of the `backend_input_t` and `backend_return_t` specializations

> for the SYCL classes which support kernel function interoperability.

Reviewer 4: Agreed, this is a mistake. There is only `get_native` within the kernels. The `backend_input_t` should be removed from the kernel function interoperability.

> for the SYCL classes which support kernel function interoperability.

Author: This wording has been removed, so I think this is resolved now.

[[table.cuda.kernelinterop.nativeobjects]]
.Types of native backend objects kernel function interoperability

> [width="100%",options="header",cols="20%,20%,20%,40%"]

Author: Yes this looks like a copy/paste error, I've corrected this.

| [code]#sampled_image_accessor<T, 2, Mode, image_target::device>#   | sycl::cuda::texture<T, 2> | sycl::cuda::texture<T, 1> | Convert a SYCL `accessor` to the `sycl::cuda::texture` interoperability type with the same type and dimensions.
| [code]#sampled_image_accessor<T, 3, Mode, image_target::device>#   | sycl::cuda::texture<T, 3> | sycl::cuda::texture<T, 1> | Convert a SYCL `accessor` to the `sycl::cuda::texture` interoperability type with the same type and dimensions.
| [code]#unsampled_image_accessor<T, 1, Mode, image_target::device># | sycl::cuda::surface<T, 1> | sycl::cuda::surface<T, 1> | Convert a SYCL `accessor` to the `sycl::cuda::surface` interoperability type with the same type and dimensions.
| [code]#unsampled_image_accessor<T, 2, Mode, image_target::device># | sycl::cuda::surface<T, 2> | sycl::cuda::surface<T, 1> | Convert a SYCL `accessor` to the `sycl::cuda::surface` interoperability type with the same type and dimensions.
| [code]#unsampled_image_accessor<T, 3, Mode, image_target::device># | sycl::cuda::surface<T, 3> | sycl::cuda::surface<T, 1> | Convert a SYCL `accessor` to the `sycl::cuda::surface` interoperability type with the same type and dimensions.

> | [code]#stream#                                                     | signed char * | signed char * | Convert a SYCL `accessor` to an undecorated raw signed char pointer.

Author: Interop for the `stream` class has been removed, so I think this is resolved now.

|====

[[sec:non_core_features_and_extensions]]
== Non-core features and extensions

Additional CUDA features are available depending upon the devices compute capability.
SYCL can support these optional CUDA features with extensions.
Unlike OpenCL, CUDA needs to know if the extension is available at compile time. 

> As a result there are no valid CUDA extensions which can be passed to `has_extension`.

Reviewer 5: Agreed. This will be corrected in next version of this document.

> As a result there are no valid CUDA extensions which can be passed to `has_extension`.

Author: This wording has been removed, so I think this is resolved now.

> As the extension must be known at runtime CUDA extensions are best implemented 

Reviewer 5: Correct thanks.

> As the extension must be known at runtime CUDA extensions are best implemented 

Author: This wording has been removed, so I think this is resolved now.

using feature test macros. The test macro format is 
SYCL_EXT_<vendorstring>_<featurename>. For CUDA extensions this format translates 
to SYCL_EXT_NVIDIA_<featurename>. Similarly, the format for the naming of extension 
classes and enumerations should be ext_<vendorstring>_<featurename>. Which in this context

> becomes ext_NVIDIA_<featurename>. Given the necessity to know the extension at 

Reviewer 5: Internally we have decided that using the feature test macro format `SYCL_EXT_<vendor>_<feature>` should use the usual vendor (ONEAPI, HIPSYCL etc) but should also include the word `CUDA` if it is related solely to the CUDA backend. Therefore a feature test macro for some CUDA extension in oneAPI becomes `SYCL_EXT_ONEAPI_CUDA_<feature>`

> becomes ext_NVIDIA_<featurename>. Given the necessity to know the extension at 

Reviewer 5: This would make it easier to introduce extensions, as using `KHR` in the macro would require a vote from the entire SYCL group

compile-time, the usage of extension macros should be the primary method of determining 
if the extension is available in the SYCL implementation not. 
A list of non-core CUDA features which have SYCL support is below.
Non-core CUDA features for require a compute capability of greater than 5.

TODO: The table below shows a proposal for SYCL supported CUDA extensions.
The table should be developed with other members of the SYCL community.

[[table.extensionsupport]]

> .SYCL support for CUDA 11.3 extensions

Reviewer 5: I think the idea of adding a column for feature test macros is a good idea. We want to discourage the use of sycl::aspects to determine the availability of extensions, since the extensions need to be configured at compile time rather than runtime. Therefore we will replace the SYCL Aspect column with a feature test macro column.

We can also remove the Core SYCL API column

> .SYCL support for CUDA 11.3 extensions

Reviewer 5: sycl::aspects describing extensions are useful to check if a particular device has a capability at runtime. Do you think any mention of such aspects is outside the scope of this document?

> .SYCL support for CUDA 11.3 extensions

Author: We've updated the table to reflect the associated SYCL aspect and feature macro for each extension, the table is currently empty, but serves as a placeholder for us to populate in the future.

[width="100%",options="header",cols="35%,35%,15%, 15"]
|====
| SYCL Aspect              | CUDA Extension                                        | Core SYCL API | Required Compute Capability 
| [code]#aspect::fp16#     | [code]#16-bit floating point#                         | Yes           | 5.3 or greater
| -                        | [code]#Tensor Cores#                                  | No            | 7 or greater
| -                        | [code]#Atomic floating-point operations#              | No            | 6 or greater
|====

=== Aspects
Aspects are used to query what features and attributes a device has. Some aspects such as `fp16`
are non-core CUDA features. Therefore, the runtime must be able to determine what aspects CUDA 
devices have. This can be performed by querying `cudaDeviceProp::major` and `cudaDeviceProp::minor`
to find out the compute capability. The compute capability indicates what extensions are

> available to the device, and therefore what aspects are available.

Reviewer 5: This is a valid point. We have omitted/rephrased some things in the latest iteration, which we will be posting shortly.

[[sec:cuda:extension-fp16]]
=== Half precision floating-point

The half scalar data type: [code]#half# and the half vector data types:
[code]#half1#, [code]#half2#, [code]#half3#,
[code]#half4#, [code]#half8# and [code]#half16# must be
available at compile-time. However a kernel using these types is only
supported on devices that have [code]#aspect::fp16#, i.e. compute capability

> 5.3 or greater.

Reviewer 5: This is correct. We have rephrased this section in the next iteration.

> 5.3 or greater.

Author: This wording has been updated, so I think this is resolved now.

[[sub:cuda:extensions]]

> === Extensions

Reviewer 5: This is a placeholder section for later extensions

> === Extensions

Author: This wording has been updated, so I think this is resolved now.

may use multiple CUDA streams to implement an out of order SYCL <<queue>>.

[[sub:cuda:memory_model]]
=== Memory model

==== Accessing memory on a different GPU

Devices belonging to the same context must be able to access (directly or indirectly) each other's global memory. This is done in one of the following ways:

- Device directly accesses memory on another device (peer-to-peer memory access).
- CUDA-runtime-managed memory is used. CUDA runtime copies the data from one device to another.
- Peer copy (one of [code]#CuMemcpyPeerAsync# or [code]#CuMemcpy3DPeerAsync#) is used to directly copy the data from one device to another.
- The data is copied from one device to the host, and then from host to another device.

==== Shared USM memory advices

Values for the [code]#advice# parameter of [code]#sycl::queue::mem_advise# and [code]#sycl::handler::mem_advise# and their mapping to CUDA equivalent are defined in table <<table.cuda.memmodel.advices>>.

[[table.cuda.memmodel.advices]]
.Valid shared USM advices and their equivalents in CUDA
[width="100%",options="header",cols="40%,30%,30%"]
|====
| SYCL shared USM advice | CUDA managed memory advice | processor, the advice is set for

> | [code]#sycl::cuda::advice::cuda_mem_advise_set_read_mostly# | [code]#cudaMemAdviseSetReadMostly# | device associated with the queue/handler

Reviewer 6: @AerialMantis FYI these `advise` names seem to be different than those used in DPC++: https://github.com/t4c1/llvm-test-suite/blob/1a5a4e9d72cccf290d88f2498c08314d8bfb271e/SYCL/USM/memadvise_cuda.cpp#L39

Do we need to update one or other of the documentation / dpc++ impl?

Author: Good catch, these are different, but I think we may want to update DPC++ to match what we have in here. I have also updated the definitions here to follow the correct extension convention.

| [code]#sycl::cuda::advice::cuda_mem_advise_set_accessed_by# | [code]#cudaMemAdviseSetAccessedBy# | device associated with the queue/handler
| [code]#sycl::cuda::advice::cuda_mem_advise_unset_accessed_by# | [code]#cudaMemAdviseUnsetAccessedBy# | device associated with the queue/handler
| [code]#sycl::cuda::advice::cuda_mem_advise_set_preferred_location_host# | [code]#cudaMemAdviseSetPreferredLocation# | host
| [code]#sycl::cuda::advice::cuda_mem_advise_unset_preferred_location_host# | [code]#cudaMemAdviseUnsetPreferredLocation# | host
| [code]#sycl::cuda::advice::cuda_mem_advise_set_accessed_by_host# | [code]#cudaMemAdviseSetAccessedBy# | host
| [code]#sycl::cuda::advice::cuda_mem_advise_unset_accessed_by_host# | [code]#cudaMemAdviseUnsetAccessedBy# | host
|====

==== Supported image formats

Supported image formats are:

* r8g8b8a8_unorm
* r16g16b16a16_unorm
* r8g8b8a8_sint
* r16g16b16a16_sint
* r32b32g32a32_sint
* r8g8b8a8_uint
* r16g16b16a16_uint
* r32b32g32a32_uint
* r16b16g16a16_sfloat
* r32g32b32a32_sfloat
* b8g8r8a8_unorm

==== Samplers

> In both SYCL and CUDA samplers consist of addressing mode, filtering mode and coordinate normalization mode. Mapping between SYCL and CUDA values is defined in tables <<table.cuda.memmodel.sampler_addressing>>, <<table.cuda.memmodel.sampler_filtering>> and <<table.cuda.memmodel.sampler_normalization>>. In CUDA addressing modes for all dimesnions will be the same, as CUDA allows different addressing modes for different dimesnions, while SYCL does not. 

Author: Fixed.

> // %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% begin cuda_backend %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

Reviewer 2: Putting some general formatting comments here just so the conversation can be threaded:

* The SYCL spec uses `[code]#...#` for code markup not backticks.  All of the backticks should be changed to use `[code]#...#` instead.

* I got the following warnings when building the Asciiidoc sources:
  
  ```
  asciidoctor: WARNING: chapters/cuda_backend.adoc: line 481: id assigned to block already in use: table.extensionsupport
  asciidoctor: WARNING: chapters/cuda_backend.adoc: line 523: id assigned to block already in use: table.extensionsupport
  ```

* The formatting of some of the tables could be improved, but you can only see this in the rendered PDF or HTML version.  I find it easiest to install the Docker container, which allows you to build these yourself.  Another option is to download the "spec-outputs" artifact from GitHub.  (Click on the "Checks" tab in this PR.)

Reviewer 6: This has been dealt with in our internal draft, commit here will be made once other points are dealt with.

[appendix]
[[chapter:cuda-backend]]
= CUDA backend specification

This chapter describes how the SYCL general programming model is mapped on top
of CUDA, and how the SYCL generic interoperability interface must be
implemented by vendors providing SYCL for CUDA implementations to ensure SYCL

> applications written for the CUDA backend are interoperable.

Reviewer 6: This has been dealt with in our internal draft, commit here will be made once other points are dealt with.

This section gives a general overview of how the SYCL programming model maps to
CUDA. These two programming models are pretty similar in essence however they do
have a few differences in terminology and architecture.

[[sub:cuda:platform_model]]
=== Platform Model

A SYCL device maps to a single CUDA device.  As CUDA does not split into
separate platforms there is no 'platform' concept in CUDA corresponding to the
SYCL platform. Instead, a SYCL platform maps to a collection of CUDA devices
represented by `std::vector<CUdevice>`.

A SYCL <<context>> simply maps to one, or multiple CUDA contexts. Indeed while
a CUDA context is tied to a single device, this is not the case for a SYCL
<<context>> and the CUDA backend implementation may use multiple CUDA contexts
to emulate a SYCL <<context>> containing multiple devices. Additionally, while
SYCL contexts are simple objects passed around either implicitly or explicitly,
CUDA contexts require to be activated on the current thread to be used by other
CUDA entry points. Therefore any use of the SYCL APIs with a CUDA backend may
modify the current active context on the thread, and no guarantee is provided

> that any existing active CUDA context would be restored by SYCL.

Reviewer 6: cc @npmiller ^

> that any existing active CUDA context would be restored by SYCL.

Reviewer 3: So for the context part you are understanding that correctly, and yes it is legal for the application to change the active context before the next SYCL API call. Essentially the SYCL runtime must ensure that it's using the correct context associated with the `sycl::context`, but we don't want to force it to have to restore existing CUDA contexts, as this is a concern for performance and can sometimes lead to errors as well. This stems from issues we had in DPC++ (see write-up here: https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/4442 ), and trying to keep the guidelines as general as possible so they can work with different implementations.

About the active devices, this is a very good question, so CUDA has two different APIs, the "driver API" which is lower level and used in DPC++ and the "runtime API" which is higher level and used for example in hipSYCL. The concept of active device is a "runtime API" concept and it's not in the "driver API", but it would make sense to touch on that in this CUDA backend spec as well.

I had another look through the CUDA Runtime and Driver APIs and as far as I can tell devices and contexts are the only objects to have this concept of being "active".

I'll have a second look at this and the `device` description to try and clarify this a bit and maybe make it more friendly to the runtime API as well.

may use multiple CUDA streams to implement an out of order SYCL <<queue>>.

[[sub:cuda:memory_model]]
=== Memory model

==== Accessing memory on a different GPU

Devices belonging to the same context must be able to access (directly or indirectly) each other's global memory. This is done in one of the following ways:

- Device directly accesses memory on another device (peer-to-peer memory access).
- CUDA-runtime-managed memory is used. CUDA runtime copies the data from one device to another.
- Peer copy (one of [code]#CuMemcpyPeerAsync# or [code]#CuMemcpy3DPeerAsync#) is used to directly copy the data from one device to another.
- The data is copied from one device to the host, and then from host to another device.

==== Shared USM memory advices

Values for the `advice` parameter of `sycl::queue::mem_advise` and `sycl::handler::mem_advice` and their mapping to CUDA equivalent are defined in table <<table.cuda.memmodel.advices>>.

[[table.cuda.memmodel.advices]]
.Valid shared USM advices and their equivalents in CUDA
[width="100%",options="header",cols="40%,30%,30%"]
|====
| SYCL shared USM advice | CUDA managed memory advice | processor, the advice is set for

> | CUDA_MEM_ADVISE_SET_READ_MOSTLY | cudaMemAdviseSetReadMostly | device associated with the queue/handler

Reviewer 6: @AidanBeltonS what do you think?

> | CUDA_MEM_ADVISE_SET_READ_MOSTLY | cudaMemAdviseSetReadMostly | device associated with the queue/handler

Reviewer: I agree - this was an oversight. These should be lowercase and in sycl::cuda namespace.

> | CUDA_MEM_ADVISE_SET_READ_MOSTLY | cudaMemAdviseSetReadMostly | device associated with the queue/handler

Reviewer 6: This has been dealt with in our internal draft, commit here will be made once other points are dealt with.

[width="100%",options="header",cols="50%,50%"]
|====
| SYCL sampler filtering mode | CUDA sampler filtering mode
| [code]#sycl::filtering_mode::nearest# | [code]#cudaFilterModePoint#
| [code]#sycl::filtering_mode::linear# | [code]#cudaFilterModeLinear#
|====

[[table.cuda.memmodel.sampler_normalization]]
.Mapping of SYCL sampler coordinate normalization modes to CUDA
[width="100%",options="header",cols="50%,50%"]
|====
| SYCL sampler coordinate normalization mode | CUDA sampler coordinate normalization mode
| [code]#sycl::coordinate_normalization_mode::normalized# | [code]#normalizedCoords = true#
| [code]#sycl::coordinate_normalization_mode::unnormalized# | [code]#normalizedCoords = false#
|====

==== Address Spaces

Table <<table.cuda.memmodel.address_spaces>> maps SYCL address spaces to CUDA address spaces.

[[table.cuda.memmodel.address_spaces]]
.Mapping from SYCL address spaces to CUDA address spaces
[width="100%",options="header",cols="50%,50%"]
|====
| SYCL Address Space | CUDA Address Space
| Global memory | global
| Local memory | shared
| Private memory | registers or local
| Generic memory | generic
| Constant memory | const
|====

==== Atomics

> Not all CUDA devices support all memory orders. If a particular memory order is unsupported by a CUDA device, it can be unsupported in the SYCL CUDA backend for that device. Sequentially consistent atomics are currently not supported on any device, so the SYCL CUDA backend is not required to implement them. The mappings of other memory orders (when supported by the device) is defined in table <<table.cuda.memmodel.memory_orders>>.

Reviewer 6: +1 for removing the line: I thought that relaxed meant no restrictions so extra limitations wouldn't be possible by definition? In any case the most basic memory order in CUDA is relaxed with a matching definition to the SYCL spec.

> Not all CUDA devices support all memory orders. If a particular memory order is unsupported by a CUDA device, it can be unsupported in the SYCL CUDA backend for that device. Sequentially consistent atomics are currently not supported on any device, so the SYCL CUDA backend is not required to implement them. The mappings of other memory orders (when supported by the device) is defined in table <<table.cuda.memmodel.memory_orders>>.

Reviewer: I put that here to emphasize that support for memory orders depends on device, not on the implementation of the backend. It could as well be removed.

| [code]#memory_order::seq_cst# | sc
|====

If future versions of PTX ISA define fence instructions with only acquire or only release memory order, these can be used as well for [code]#memory_order::acquire# and [code]#memory_order::release# on devices that support them.

Mapping of SYCL memory scopes to PTX ISA is the same as for atomics. It is defined in <<table.cuda.memmodel.memory_scopes>>.

[[sub:cuda:execution_model]]
=== Execution Model

CUDA's execution model is similar to SYCL's. CUDA uses kernels to
offload computation, splitting the host and GPU into asynchronous 
computing devices. In general, except for CUDA's dynamic 
parallelism extensions, kernels are called by the host. 

CUDA GPUs are constructed out of streaming multiprocessors (SM) 
which perform the actual computation. Each SM consists of 8 scalar 
cores, shared memory, registers, a load/store unit, and a scheduler 
unit. CUDA uses a hierarchy of threads to organize the execution of
kernels. Kernels are split up into thread blocks. The threadblocks 
form a grid each thread can identify its location within the grid 
using a block ID. The grid is a concept used to index threadblocks 

> the grid can be one, two, or three dimensions. Each thread block is 

Reviewer 6: +1

> the grid can be one, two, or three dimensions. Each thread block is 

Reviewer 6: This has been dealt with in our internal draft, commit here will be made once other points are dealt with.

of work-items may be achieved through the CUDA interop API, which gives
the same guarantees as native CUDA.

SYCL has a similar execution hierarchy consisting of kernels. 
The kernel is broken down into work-items. Each work-item concurrently
executes an instance of the kernel on a piece of memory. Work-items 
can be combined into work-groups that have designated shared memory.
Work-groups can synchronize their work-items with work-group barriers.

There are some equivalences between CUDA and SYCL execution models. 
For example, CUDA's stream multiprocessor is equal to a SYCL compute 
unit. CUDA's grid is similar to SYCL's nd_range as it is the highest 
level grouping of threads, not including the whole kernel. Both 
nd_range and grid can segment the groups of threads into one, two, or 
three dimensions. SYCL sub-groups roughly map to
cooperative groups `thread_block_tile` as it allows for the
work-group/thread block to be further subdivided into concurrent threads.
Likewise, thread blocks map directly to work-groups, and a
single thread is a SYCL work-item.

CUDA primarily synchronizes the threads through two functions,

> `cudaStreamSynchronize()` and `__syncthreads()`. 

Reviewer 6: This has been dealt with in our internal draft, commit here will be made once other points are dealt with.

memory as it does its work. However, this gives poorly coalesced memory 
accesses, as a given contiguous chunk of data being loaded may only pass 
memory to a single work-item. More efficient memory access patterns are 
achieved when each load of contiguous data can give data to as many 
work-items as possible. Meaning the data used by a given work-item
is non-contiguous.

SYCL makes this intuitive row-major C++ approach give good memory access 
patterns by flipping the indices of the `nd_range`, as it maps to hardware.

The linear id (whose use is not recommended) of a two dimensional `nd_range` 
can be calculated using:

[source,c++]
----
cgh.parallel_for(range<2>(64, 128), [=](item<2> it) {
  size_t linearIdx = it.get_id(1) + (it.get_id(0) * it.get_range(0));
  ...
});
----

Notice that rows appear to be accessed in a column-major, rather than 
row-major, format. This is only the case because the indices are flipped 
by the SYCL implementation. All memory in SYCL is stored in row-major format.

It is best to avoid calculating the linear index manually; it is better
to use a multi-dimensional `sycl::id` to index into memory, as it doesn't

> expose index-flipping to the user.

Reviewer 6: @hdelan I also find it a bit unclear in parts. Perhaps you can clarify a little that the CUDA backend uses a different format to the SYCL frontend (if this is necessary/useful to mention here?) and best practice for a user to avoid running into related issues/ what they need to know about the index flipping if they can't avoid running into this issue?

> expose index-flipping to the user.

Reviewer 6: This has been dealt with in our internal draft, commit here will be made once other points are dealt with.

[[table.cuda.CUDA_features_to_SYCL]]
.CUDA execution features with their corresponding SYCL features
[width="100%",options="header",cols="50%,50%"]
|====
| [code]#SYCL#                                                       | [code]#CUDA#
| [code]#Compute unit#                                               | [code]#Streaming multiprocessor#
| [code]#nd_range#                                                   | [code]#grid#
| [code]#work-group#                                                 | [code]#Thread block#
| [code]#sub-group#                                                  | [code]#thread_block_tile#
| [code]#work-item#                                                  | [code]#Thread#
| [code]#SYCL nd_item synchronization#                               | [code]#cudaStreamSynchronize#
| [code]#work-group barrier#                                         | [code]#__syncthread#
|====

[[sec::programming_interface]]
== Programming Interface

[[sub:cuda:queries]]
=== Queries

For all event information profiling descriptors, the calls to 
[code]#sycl::event::get_profiling_info# return the time (in nanoseconds) since 

> the creation of the context that the event is associated with. The "Resolution"

Reviewer 6: @t4c1 what do you think?

BTW should the meaning of "timebase" be obvious? The interpretation for it that I get from #242 is that it represents "timestamp" from an event that has the same invariant value across a given backend. I thought this should also be satisfied in the CUDA backend with the caveat of the large 10^-6 error range. BTW do other backends have such large errors with respect to the nanosecond unit time? Should a note that the error can be much larger than 10^-9 in some backends be added to the content from #242?

> the creation of the context that the event is associated with. The "Resolution"

Reviewer: The DPC++ implementation can be changed to use a common base event, for example, in the platform object. So it can conform to the changes in the SYCL spec, but the CUDA backend spec needs to be updated.

> the creation of the context that the event is associated with. The "Resolution"

Reviewer 2: I don't think the spec needs to say anything about the granularity of the timestamps.  This seems like a "quality of implementation" thing.

> the creation of the context that the event is associated with. The "Resolution"

Reviewer 2: I think it is OK for this CUDA backend specification to note the timer resolution, so  it is OK to keep this wording:

> The resolution (timing error) of the returned value is the same as that provided by the CUDA driver API call `cuEventElapsedTime`: +/- 0.5 microseconds.

Does everyone agree that this statement (and the implementation) will change, though?

> For all event information profiling descriptors, the calls to  `sycl::event::get_profiling_info` return the time (in nanoseconds) **since the creation of the context** that the event is associated with.

Instead, we want all profiling timestamps from the CUDA backend to share the same "timebase".  It sounds like you think this is possible to implement, @t4c1?

> the creation of the context that the event is associated with. The "Resolution"

Reviewer: Yes, it should not be too much work.

> the creation of the context that the event is associated with. The "Resolution"

Reviewer 6: @t4c1 can you specify what the exact wording of the update should be now?

> the creation of the context that the event is associated with. The "Resolution"

Reviewer: Something like: 
```suggestion
the creation of the CUDA platform (which happens when application is started). The "Resolution"
```

[code]#queue#, [code]#event# and [code]#kernel#. All parameter values defined 
in the SYCL specification are supported.

Querying for [code]#info::device::backend_version# by calling 
[code]#device::get_info# returns the CUDA compute capability of the device.

Currently no parameters are defined for [code]#get_backend_info# member 
functions of classes [code]#platform#, [code]#context#, [code]#device#, 
[code]#queue#, [code]#event# and [code]#kernel#.

[[sub:cuda:application_interoperability]]
=== Application Interoperability

This section describes the API level interoperability between SYCL and CUDA.

The CUDA backend supports API interoperability for `platform`, `device`,
`context`, `queue`, and `event`. Interoperability for `buffer`, `kernel`,
`kernel_bundle`, `device_image`, `sampled_image` and `unsampled_image` are not
supported.

[[table.cuda.appinterop.nativeobjects]]
.Types of native backend objects application interoperability
[width="100%",options="header",cols="20%,20%,20%,40%"]
|====
| [code]#SyclType# | [code]#backend_input_t<backend::cuda, SyclType># | [code]#backend_return_t<backend::cuda, SyclType># | Description

> | [code]#platform# | `std::vector<CUdevice>`   | `std::vector<CUdevice>`  | A SYCL platform encapsulates a list of CUDA devices.

Reviewer 6: cc @npmiller ^^

> | [code]#platform# | `std::vector<CUdevice>`   | `std::vector<CUdevice>`  | A SYCL platform encapsulates a list of CUDA devices.

Reviewer 3: > For example, suppose there are two CUDA devices D1 and D2. Calling platform::get_platforms() returns one CUDA platform with those two devices. What happens if the application calls make_platform<backend::cuda>({D1}) (i.e. only provides one of the devices)?

I think in that case I would expect `make_platform` to return an error and require both devices.

But you're right that the platform interop doesn't really make sense for CUDA, I think it's just better to remove it.

> | [code]#platform# | `std::vector<CUdevice>`   | `std::vector<CUdevice>`  | A SYCL platform encapsulates a list of CUDA devices.

Reviewer 6: OK I can remove the platform interop as suggested.

> | [code]#platform# | `std::vector<CUdevice>`   | `std::vector<CUdevice>`  | A SYCL platform encapsulates a list of CUDA devices.

Reviewer 6: This has been dealt with in our internal draft, commit here will be made once other points are dealt with.

| [code]#device#   | `CUdevice`                | `CUdevice`               | A SYCL device encapsulates a CUDA device.

> | [code]#context#  | `CUcontext`               | `std::vector<CUcontext>` | A SYCL context can encapsulate multiple CUDA contexts, however, it is not possible to create a SYCL context from multiple CUDA contexts.

Reviewer 6: cc @AerialMantis ^

> | [code]#queue#    | `CUstream`   | `CUstream` | A SYCL queue can encapsulates multiple CUDA stream, however, a SYCL queue can only be created from or produce one, and any synchronization required should be performed.

Reviewer 6: @npmiller @AerialMantis what do you think?

> | [code]#queue#    | `CUstream`   | `CUstream` | A SYCL queue can encapsulates multiple CUDA stream, however, a SYCL queue can only be created from or produce one, and any synchronization required should be performed.

Reviewer 2: Thanks, this seems reasonable.  If we add a table describing the `get_native` functions, the description for `get_native<queue>` can explain that the implementation may use several `CUstream` objects for each `queue`, but `get_native` returns just one and the choice is implementation defined.

> | [code]#event#    | `CUevent`    | `CUevent`  | A SYCL event can encapsulates multiple CUDA events, however, a SYCL event can only be created from or produce one, and a CUevent produced from a SYCL event may or may not be valid, use `sycl::cuda::has_native_event` to query this.

Reviewer 2: What happens if you call `get_native` for an `event` that  does not have a native event?

Same question here as above for `queue`.  What does it mean that a SYCL `event` could contain more than one native even but only one is returned from `get_native`?  Is it important for the application to know which is returned?

Reviewer 6: cc @AerialMantis

Reviewer 2: For OpenCL, `get_native<event>` returns a vector of `cl_event` objects.  Why wouldn't we do the same thing for CUDA and return a vector of `CUevent` objects?

Author: So that is definitely an option, we did think about having `get_native<event>` return all native events that are associated with the SYCL `event`, however, it introduces the problem of conveying to the user what each of these events represent in order for the user to utilise the individual events. Whereas we believe generally users just wish to just synchronize with all the commands associated with the `event`. We could expand this in the future to return all native events, but we thought that it was best to keep it simple to begin with until we have some more user experience with it. If you think this would be the better approach we could reconsider it.

Reviewer 2: I also don't know what is easiest for users.  I just seems weird that we would decide one thing for OpenCL and a different thing for CUDA.  It will probably be difficult to change this later to return a vector of events because that would be an API-breaking change.

platform + 
make_platform(const backend_input_t<Backend, platform> &backendObject);# 
        | Create a SYCL `platform` from a list of CUDA device, the list must contain at least one CUDA device. As the SYCL execution environment for the CUDA backend contains a fixed number of platforms that are enumerated via `sycl::platform::get_platforms()`. Calling this function does not create a new platform. Rather it merely creates a `sycl::platform` object that is a copy of one of the platforms from that enumeration.

| [code]#template<backend Backend> +
device +
make_device(const backend_input_t<Backend, device> &backendObject);# 
        | Construct a SYCL `device` from a CUDA device. As the SYCL execution environment for the CUDA backend contains a fixed number of devices that are enumerated via `sycl::device::get_devices()`. Calling this function does not create a new device. Rather it merely creates a `sycl::device` object that is a copy of one of the devices from that enumeration.

| [code]#template<backend Backend> +
context +
make_context(const backend_input_t<Backend, context> &backendObject,
                     const async_handler asyncHandler = {});# 

>         | Create a SYCL `context` from a CUDA context.

Author: @illuhad you make a good point, thanks for raising this. I think we could resolve this by clarifying the wording such that for some SYCL implementations the mapping of SYCL context to CUDA context is limited to the CUDA primary context, which would limit the usefulness of the feature when the implementation is based on the runtime API, however, would allow us to maintain a generic interface between the two implementation approaches.

So the wording would be clarified such that `get_native<context, backend::cuda>` is permitted to return the CUDA primary context and `make_context<backend::cuda>` is permitted to only accept the CUDA primary context, and throw an exception otherwise.

However, in order to allow users to reason about this there would need to be some kind of query which exposes whether the implementation supports interop with non-primary CUDA contexts. Aside from this particular use case, there is another situation where having such a query would be important. Within a host task, when interoperating with the native objects, it's important to know whether the SYCL implementation initializes non-primary contexts, in order to ensure that the native API calls within the host task are compatible.

I see a couple of ways we could do this:
* A. Introduce a query which tells the user specifically whether the SYCL implementation maps all SYCL contexts to the CUDA primary context or whether unique contexts are allocated, this provides the specific information we need in this case, but if perhaps less scalable.
* B. Introduce a broader query which tells the user whether the  SYCL implementation is using the driver API or the runtime API, this could be useful for other places where there is a difference between the drive API and the runtime API, though it may not reflect the case where an implementation combines the two APIs.

>         | Create a SYCL `context` from a CUDA context.

Reviewer 7: Thanks for your thoughts @AerialMantis! I agree that what you are proposing are possible solutions. I have a hunch that in practice it might be easier to work with for users if they know if an implementation is runtime or driver API based rather than make the query more fine-grained and just about context interop.
E.g. if you know that your CUDA backend is runtime API-based, you can make other assumptions about backend interop. In that case, you can know that backend interop is generally just going to work without having to worry about contexts at all, which I think can be very valuable.
I wonder if it might be easier to understand and clearer if the backend specification just had two flavors, or profiles, so that we can expose the behavior of both approaches in a more obvious way.

I suspect that even if an implementation were to utilize both APIs, you could probably figure out a definition to classify them, most likely around how they behave regarding context interop, and whether the current CUDA device from `cudaSetDevice()` plays a role.
For example, hipSYCL already uses some driver API components for manual management of PTX modules, but still follows the interop behavior of the runtime API-approach.
Do you think there are use cases where such a classification is not possible?

>         | Create a SYCL `context` from a CUDA context.

Reviewer 2: > I wonder if it might be easier to understand and clearer if the backend specification just had two flavors, or profiles, so that we can expose the behavior of both approaches in a more obvious way.

Just throwing this out there ... it is also an option to have two different CUDA backends.  This means:

* There would be two different enumerators in `enum backend`.
* Each backend would be responsible for defining its own interop specification (if it wanted to support interop).

Having a single backend interop specification is nice, but only if developers can reasonably write interop code that is portable across both CUDA backends.  If we think the two CUDA backends are just too different, it might be easier for users if each one had its own separate interop specification.

>         | Create a SYCL `context` from a CUDA context.

Author: @illuhad @gmlueck I think you make a good point, I am wary of introducing different profiles of the CUDA backend specification if possible, I think it would be valuable to have a single specification that all implementations can follow, though I recognize this may not be possible if there are cases we can't handle generically.

I've clarified the wording to state that both APIs are supported. The biggest concern there was regarding the context and whether the primary context is used. I've added a note that the CUcontexts that are returned from interop can include the primary context, and in fact, this is now what the DPC++ CUDA backend does. I suspect we may still need a query for whether the implementation is using the CUDA Driver API or CUDA Runtime API, but I'd like to avoid this if possible to avoid having any bifurcation of the specification.

> Also, I wonder: Do we believe that there will actually be a use case to invoke make_context with the same context obtained from get_native()? Or will having this query for runtime API backends just tempt users to do things that are unsupported?

This is a good point, I suspect we don't want to support this, it would like cause havoc with the ownership model.

appropriate.

[[sub:cuda:kernel_function_interoperability]]
=== Kernel Function Interoperability

This section describes the kernel function interoperability for the CUDA
backend.

The CUDA backend supports kernel function interoperability for the `accessor`,
`local_accessor`, `sampled_image_accessor` and `unsampled_image_accessor`
classes. These are exposed with `get_native` free template function.

The CUDA backend does not support interoperability for the `device_event` class
as there's no equivalent in CUDA.

Address spaces in CUDA are associated with variable decorations rather than the
type, so when pointers are passed as parameters to a function the parameter
types does not need to be decorated with an address space, instead it's simply a
raw un-decorated pointer. For this reason the `accessor` and  `local_accessor` 
classes map to a raw undecorated pointer which can be implemented using the 
generic address space.

Other kernel function types in CUDA are represented by aliases provided in the
`sycl::cuda` namespace. These are provided for the `sampled_image_accessor`,
and `unsampled_image_accessor` classes; `sycl::cuda::texture` and

> `sycl::cuda::surface` respectively.

Reviewer 6: @AerialMantis what do you think?

> `sycl::cuda::surface` respectively.

Author: That's a good point, we should specify what types these are aliases to. There's actually two options for this as CUDA has both the texture and surface reference API (https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html#texture-reference-api, https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html#surface-reference-api) and the texture and surface object API (https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html#texture-object-api, https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html#surface-object-api), though the reference API is deprecated so I think the object API makes more sense, in which case the types would be `cudaTextureObject_t` and `cudaSurfaceObject_t`. The object API is actually not templated like the reference API is, so I think we can remove the template arguments on the aliases in the SYCL CUDA backend.

So it would be something like:

```
namespace sycl::cuda {

using texture = cudaTextureObject_t ;
using surface = cudaSurfaceObject_t ;

}  // namespace sycl::cuda
```

> `sycl::cuda::surface` respectively.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for the explanation, @AerialMantis.  I still don't understand why we have aliases for these two types, though.  Why can't `backend_return_t` simply be an alias directly to `cudaTextureObject_t`.  Why does it help to have the intermediate alias named `sycl::cuda::texture`?

Below is a table of the `backend_return_t` specializations
for the SYCL classes which support kernel function interoperability.

[[table.cuda.kernelinterop.nativeobjects]]
.Types of native backend objects kernel function interoperability

> [width="100%",options="header",cols="20%,20%,20%,40%"]

Reviewer 6: This has been dealt with in our internal draft, commit here will be made once other points are dealt with.

| [code]#unsampled_image_accessor<T, 1, Mode, image_target::device># | sycl::cuda::surface<T, 1> | Convert a SYCL `unsampled_image_accessor` to the `sycl::cuda::surface` interoperability type with the same type and dimensions.
| [code]#unsampled_image_accessor<T, 2, Mode, image_target::device># | sycl::cuda::surface<T, 2> | Convert a SYCL `unsampled_image_accessor` to the `sycl::cuda::surface` interoperability type with the same type and dimensions.
| [code]#unsampled_image_accessor<T, 3, Mode, image_target::device># | sycl::cuda::surface<T, 3> | Convert a SYCL `unsampled_image_accessor` to the `sycl::cuda::surface` interoperability type with the same type and dimensions.
|====

[[sec:cuda_support_of_core_features]]
== CUDA Support of Core SYCL Features

Some core SYCL features require a minimum compute capability for the CUDA
backend.

[[table.extensionsupport]]
.CUDA support for Core SYCL API features
[width="100%",options="header",cols="33%,33%,33%"]
|====
| Feature                                   | SYCL Aspect               | Required Compute Capability 
| [code]#16-bit floating point#             | [code]#aspect::fp16#      | 5.3 or greater

> |====

Reviewer 6: I can personally see how it isn't strictly necessary, however IMO it is quite concise and could be useful to have this table since the compute capability requirement information is not always easy to find out and it seems nice for people to know the requirement before they explicitly try to write code calling the aspect. @hdelan what do you think?

[[sec:non_core_features_and_extensions]]
== Non-core features and extensions

Some additional functions are provided for the CUDA backend in the
`sycl::cuda` namespace.

[[table.noncorefeatures]]
.CUDA support for non-Core SYCL APIs

> [width="100%",options="header",cols="33%,33%,33%"]

Reviewer 6: This has been dealt with in our internal draft, commit here will be made once other points are dealt with.

to the SYCL implementation. This needs to be determined at compile time. 
Checking for the existence of feature test macros is the preferred method
for checking whether an API exists. The feature test macro format 
is `SYCL_EXT_<vendor>_<feature>`. The `<vendor>` string may also contain the
word `CUDA` for features specific to CUDA. For example, the feature test macro
for CUDA extensions in oneAPI may be either `SYCL_EXT_ONEAPI_CUDA_<feature>`,
or just `SYCL_EXT_ONEAPI_<feature>`.

Use of a given CUDA extension also requires that a chosen device has the
required compute capability to use the CUDA extension. This can be determined
using `sycl::aspect`s. Non-core SYCL aspects may be defined by an
implementation which would allow this check to happen at runtime.

The table below shows a proposal for SYCL supported CUDA extensions. This should
be populated by other members of the SYCL community.

[[table.extensionsupport]]
.SYCL support for CUDA 11.3 extensions
[width="100%",options="header",cols="35%,35%,15%, 15"]
|====
| CUDA Extension                            | SYCL Aspect   | Feature Test Macro               | Required Compute Capability 

> |====

Reviewer 2: I don't think any of this needs to be in the interop specification.  Vendors are always free to publish extensions, and each extension should describe its interface such as macros, aspects, etc.  I don't think we need any general description of this in the core backend interop specification.

I also don't think we want a list of extensions here in the core backend interop specification.  We don't want to update this backend interop spec (and get Khronos ratification) each time a vendor publishes an extension.

Reviewer 6: Sounds sensible to me. @AerialMantis ?

Reviewer 6: OK I will remove this.

[[sub:cuda:builtin-kernel-functions]]
=== Built-in Kernel Functions
The CUDA backend specification currently does not define any built-in kernel 
functions.

[[sub:cuda:error_handling]]
=== Error Handling

SYCL uses `sycl::errc` as an enum class to hold error codes. These error
codes may originate in the SYCL runtime or be passed from other runtimes to
the SYCL runtime. When a `sycl::exception` is thrown, the `sycl::errc` can
be queried using the exception's `.code()` method. Possible values for 

> `sycl::errc` include: `success`, `runtime`, `memory_allocation`, and more.

Reviewer 2: I wonder if we want this last sentence.  It seems to place an unnecessary dependency between this interop spec and the core SYCL spec.  Is it important to list the specific `sycl::errc` error codes?

Reviewer 6: I also think it is not important to list the specific `sycl::errc` codes in this way and the sentence can be removed.

Reviewer 6: This has been dealt with in our internal draft, commit here will be made once other points are dealt with.

If there is a CUDA driver API error associated with an exception triggered, then the

> CUDA error code can be obtained by the free function `CUresult sycl::cuda::get_error_code(sycl::exception&)`. In the case where there is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CUDA error code can be obtained by the free function `CUresult sycl::cuda::get_error_code(const sycl::exception&)`. In the case where there is
```

We probably want this to be `const`?

Reviewer 6: Thanks for pointing this out. I don't see a reason why it should not be const, although I also don't see a reason why the OpenCL backend equivalent (Which this CUDA backend "Error handling" section tried to match) is not const: See SYCL 2020 rev 4 page 489

**_C.7.4. Errors and limitations**
If there is an OpenCL error associated with an exception triggered, then the OpenCL error code can be
obtained by the free function `cl_int sycl::opencl::get_error_code(sycl::exception&)`. In the case where
there is no OpenCL error associated with the exception triggered, the OpenCL error code will be CL_SUC­
CESS._

I think that both backends specs should match and be `const` unless there is a good reason otherwise: in which case this reason should be described in the spec. If there is a good reason that the OpenCL backend case is not `const` then for the time being we could mention this reason here as an answer to why we use `const` here, although ideally the OpenCL backend equivalent will be immediately updated and we simply make the change you suggest which appears obvious.

Reviewer 6: This has been dealt with in our internal draft, commit here will be made once other points are dealt with.

The relevant `sycl::errc` cases and the CUDA errors that they may be mapped from are listed below.

==== build

`sycl::errc::build` is defined as:

_Error from an online compile or
link operation when compiling,
linking, or building a kernel bundle for a device._

which may be mapped from `CUDA_ERROR_NO_BINARY_FOR_GPU`, `CUDA_ERROR_JIT_COMPILER_NOT_FOUND`, `CUDA_ERROR_INVALID_PTX`, `CUDA_ERROR_UNSUPPORTED_PTX_VERSION`, `CUDA_ERROR_SHARED_OBJECT_INIT_FAILED`, `CUDA_ERROR_SHARED_OBJECT_SYMBOL_NOT_FOUND`.

==== memory_allocation

`sycl::errc::memory_allocation` is defined as:

_Error on memory allocation on the
SYCL device for a SYCL kernel._

which may be mapped from `CUDA_ERROR_OUT_OF_MEMORY`.

==== kernel_argument

`sycl::errc::kernel_argument` is defined as:

_The application has passed an invalid argument to a SYCL kernel
function. This includes captured
variables if the SYCL kernel function is a lambda function._

> which may be mapped from `CUDA_ERROR_NOT_FOUND`.

Reviewer 2: I wonder if we want this part, though.  Do we really want to list the specific CUDA error codes that could correlate to each SYCL `errc`?  For example, do you want the CTS to fail if `cuda::get_error_code()` returns some CUDA error that is *not* in this list?  I think it might be better to leave this mapping as an implementation detail.

Reviewer 2: There is probably a larger issue here about which error codes should be listed in the SYCL specification.

One option is that the spec should only list error codes that are specified to be thrown someplace in the core spec.  For example, `errc::build` is one of the error codes listed for the kernel bundle APIs, so the core spec needs to list `build` as one of the error codes.  By this rationale, we would remove any error codes that are not specifically called out anywhere in the spec.  (This is the topic of internal issue 512.)

For backend-specific errors, we would throw a SYCL exception with some generic SYCL error code (e.g. `errc::runtime`), and then it would be up to the application to use `sycl::cuda::get_error_code()` in order to get the CUDA specific error.  This way, we do not need to worry about which SYCL error corresponds to each backend error, and we don't need to add new SYCL errors whenever a new backend has an error that doesn't map well.

Reviewer 6: This has been dealt with in our internal draft, commit here will be made once other points are dealt with.
